Our text comments contain this thought
(if you look about halfway down,
there’s a sentence that says):
“Feeling tender compassion
will move us to acts of kindness.”
It’s interesting that the Bible
in different places
links those two qualities together.
For example, Ephesians 4:32 states:
“Become kind to one another,
tenderly compassionate.”
Insight on the Scriptures  defines
compassion this way:
“A sympathetic awareness
of another’s suffering or adversity
coupled with a desire to alleviate it.”
So we have the awareness
—we have the feeling—
along with that desire to act kindly.
But sadly, as The Watchtower  once mentioned:
“The moral climate of our time . . .
has killed compassion
in the hearts of so many.”
A “Watching the World” item
highlighted that some years ago in the Awake!
In Italy, a six-year-old girl and her father
were driving to the beach.
As they entered a tunnel, the father,
who was only in his 30’s,
suddenly suffered a heart attack.
Before he died, he told his little girl
to find her way home.
She struggled out of the tunnel,
repeatedly blown over by gusts of wind
from cars that zipped by without slowing.
Scratched, bleeding, and in tears,
she walked along the highway
for half an hour,
ignored by hundreds of passing cars
filled with vacationers
until finally one car stopped to help.
Newspaper editorials around the country
asked searching questions,
such as whether the country’s affluence
had made it lose
some of the warmth and compassion
for which it had long been famous.
One newspaper mentioned:
“Along the happy road of vacation,
“there were no scheduled stops
for attending to the pain of others.”
Well, that account sadly illustrates
the world that we live in.
Let’s talk a little bit more
about this quality of compassion.
We’ll consider when compassion
should not be shown,
we’ll look at an example
of Jehovah’s compassion,
and then we’ll consider some practical ways
that we can show compassion.
First, there are times when compassion
should not be shown.
For example, if someone
deliberately persists in sin,
it would be wrong to feel that we
should compassionately shield them
from discipline.
See, that would be misplaced compassion.
Let’s notice an example in ancient Israel.
Please turn with me to Deuteronomy chapter 13
—Deuteronomy 13.
If you look at verse 6,
the Israelites were commanded
that if a brother, child,
and you’ll notice there some expressions
such as “cherished wife”
or “closest companion,”
if any of those were to urge
a person to “serve other gods,”
notice the instruction in verse 8:
“You must not give in to him
or listen to him, nor should you show pity
“or feel compassion or protect him;
instead, you should kill him without fail.”
Now, why was that so important?
Why was it important not to show compassion?
Well, verse 11: “Then all Israel
will hear and become afraid,
“and they will never again
do anything bad like this among you.”
So it was for a protection for the nation.
If someone tried to turn an Israelite
from serving Jehovah,
that was not the time to show compassion.
Yielding to pressure to show compassion
when it’s contrary to God’s will
can have serious consequences.
So we certainly need to avoid
misplaced compassion.
Now let’s consider an example
of Jehovah’s compassion.
Turn with me to Exodus chapter 3
—Exodus chapter 3.
While tending to his father-in-law’s sheep,
Moses saw something he’d never seen before.
And I daresay none of us
have ever seen it either.
Moses saw a thornbush on fire,
but it wasn’t being consumed.
So Moses decided to go and investigate.
By means of an angel, Jehovah spoke
to Moses from the midst of the fire.
And notice what he said in verse 5:
“Do not come any nearer.
“Remove your sandals from your feet,
because the place where you are standing
is holy ground.”
So just think: Because the holy God
was present representatively,
the ground itself became holy.
Now, keep that thought in mind;
we’re going to come back to it.
Let’s focus now on Jehovah’s compassion
for his people who were suffering in Egypt.
Notice verse 7: “Jehovah added:
“‘I have certainly seen the affliction
of my people who are in Egypt,
“‘and I have heard their outcry
because of those who force them to work;
I well know the pains they suffer.’”
So Jehovah wasn’t blind
to the misery of his people.
He wasn’t deaf to their cries for help.
Their anguish became his own.
Did you notice the expression
at the end of the verse?
“I well know the pains they suffer.”
Regarding the phrase “I well know,”
one reference work states:
“The expression implies personal feeling,
tenderness, and compassion.”
So Jehovah’s words here
reveal a deeply concerned,
caring, and compassionate God.
And what would Jehovah do?
Would he act kindly on that compassion?
Well, we know he was going to.
In verse 10, in part,
Jehovah commissioned Moses:
“Bring my people . . . out of Egypt.”
You know, this account should be
encouraging to us.
We can be sure that Jehovah
sees our adversities.
He hears our cries for help.
He knows the pain that we suffer at times.
But Jehovah just doesn’t feel
compassion for us.
No, he’s moved to act kindly.
Why?
First Peter 5:7
—he cares for each one of us.
God’s compassion also gives us
reason for hope.
One sister who struggled
with depression and discouragement
found comfort in this account
about Moses and the thornbush.
Remember the holy ground
that we read about in verse 5.
The sister said:
“If Jehovah can make even the dirt holy,
then maybe there is a little hope for me.”
See, she’d benefited
from Jehovah’s compassion.
Well, so far we’ve seen the need
to avoid misplaced compassion.
We’ve considered Jehovah’s example
of not only feeling  compassion
but acting  kindly on it.
How can we imitate him?
One quality that can help is love
—unselfish love—
of neighbor.
Let’s consider two practical ways
that can help us
—that we can show this type of compassion.
First, compassion will help us to avoid
reacting harshly when others make mistakes.
Remember that earlier we quoted
Ephesians 4:32,
linking kindness and compassion.
Well, let’s turn to the verse
just previous to it
—Ephesians 4 and let’s read verse 31—
Ephesians 4:31.
Keep that thought in mind:
Compassion will help us
to avoid reacting harshly
when others make mistakes.
Verse 31: “Put away from yourselves
every kind of malicious bitterness,
“anger, wrath, screaming, and abusive speech,
as well as everything injurious.”
And then verse 32 says:
“But [there’s the connector, but]
“become kind to one another,
tenderly compassionate.”
So whether at home, in the congregation,
at Bethel, on construction sites
—wherever we may be—
let’s allow love,
this unselfish love of neighbor,
to cause us to show compassion
and avoid reacting harshly
when others make mistakes.
A second way that love can help us
to be compassionate
is that it will help us
to avoid the imperfect tendency
to abuse power.
Colossians 3:12 states:
“Clothe yourselves with the tender affections
of compassion, kindness.”
There are the two linked together again,
and then the verse adds “humility
[or “lowliness of mind,” ftn.].”
The Watchtower  once made
this point about that verse:
“Lowliness of mind
enables us to put ourselves
“in the position of those
under our supervision.
“To be compassionate involves
being humble and reasonable
“rather than hard to please.
“Efficiency should not be an excuse
for treating people
as mere parts of a machine”
—good points to keep in mind.
So those are two ways that love
can help us to be compassionate:
Avoid reacting harshly
when others make mistakes,
and avoid the imperfect tendency
to abuse power.
So while the moral climate
has killed compassion
in the hearts of so many today,
we want to be known for our compassion.
Of course, never would we want
to display misplaced compassion
if someone deliberately persists in sin.
Rather, we want to imitate Jehovah
and kindly act on our feelings of compassion
for those in need.
So as we go about our day,
let’s look for ways
that we can heed the admonition
there at Ephesians 4:32:
“Become kind to one another,
tenderly compassionate.”